# What is a Design Pattern?

> Each pattern describes a problem which occurs over and over again in our environment, and then describes the core of the solution to that problem, in such a way that you can use this solution a million times over, without ever doing it the same way twice.
> 
> <cite> - Christopher Alexander</cite>

In general, a pattern has four essential elements:

1. The **pattern name** is a handle we can use to describe a design problem, its solutions, and consequences in a word or two. Naming a pattern immediately increases our design vocabulary.
2. The **problem** describes when to apply the pattern. It explains the problem and its context. It might describe specific design problems such as how to represent algorithms as objects. It might describe class or object structures that are symptomatic of an inflexible design. Sometimes the problem will include a list of conditions that must be met before it makes sense to apply the pattern.
3. The **solution** describes the elements that make up the design, their relationships, responsibilities, and collaborations. The solution doesn't describe a particular concrete design or implementation, because a pattern is like a template that can be applied in many different situations. Instead, the pattern provides an abstract description of a design problem and how a general arrangement of elements (classes and objects) solves it. 
4. The **consequences** are the results and trade-offs of applying the pattern. Though consequences are often unvoices when we describe design decisions, they are critical for evaluating design alternatives and for understanding the costs and benefits of applying the pattern.

The design patterns in the book are `descriptions of communicating objects and classes that are customized to solve a general design problem in a particular context`.