# How to Select a Design Pattern
With more than 20 design patterns in the catalog to choose from, it might be hard to find the one that addresses a particular design problem, especially if the catalog is new and unfamiliar to you. Here are several different approaches to finding the design pattern that's right for your problem:

- **Consider how design patterns solve design problems**. [Section 1.3](<1.3 How design patterns solve design problems.md>) discusses how design patterns help you find appropriate objects, determine object granularity, specify object interfaces, and several other ways in which design patterns solve design problems. Referring to these discussions can help you guide your search for the right pattern.
- **Scan Intent sections**. [Section 1.2](<1.2 The catalog of design patterns.md>) lists the Intent sections from all the patterns in the catalog. Read through each pattern's intent to find one or more that sound relevant to your problem. You can use the classification scheme to narrow your search.
- **Study how patterns interrelate**. Studying these relationships can help direct you to the right pattern or group of patterns.
- **Study patterns of like purpose**. The catalog has three chapters, one for creational patterns, another for structural patterns and a third for behavioral patterns. Each chapter starts off with introductory comments on the patterns and concludes with a section that compares and contrasts them. These sections give you insight into the similarities and differences between patterns of like purpose.
- **Examine a cause of redesign**.  Look at the causes of redesign ([Section 1.3: Designing for change](<1.3 How design patterns solve design problems.md#designing-for-change>)) to see if your problem involves one or more of them. Then look at the patterns that help you avoid the causes of redesign.
- **Consider what should be variable in your design**. This approach is the opposite of focusing on the causes of redesign. Instead of considering what might *force* a change to a design, consider what you want to be *able* to change without redesign. The focus here is on *encapsulating the concept that varies*, a theme of many design patterns. Table in [Section 1.5](<1.5 How to use a design pattern.md>) lists the design aspect(s) that design patterns let you vary independently, thereby letting you change them without redesign.