# How to Use a Design Pattern
Here's a step-by-step approach to applying a design pattern effectively:

1. **Read the pattern once through for an overview**. Pay particular attention to the Applicability and Consequences sections to ensure the pattern is right for your problem.
2. **Go back and study the Structure, Participants, and Collaborations sections**. Make sure you understand the classes and objects in the pattern and how they relate to one another.
3. **Look at the Sample Code section to see a concrete example of the pattern in code**. Studying the code helps you learn how to implement the pattern.
4. **Choose names for pattern participants that are meaningful in the application context**. The names for participants in design patterns are usually too abstract to appear directly in an application. Nevertheless, it's useful to incorporate the participant name into the name that appears in the application. That helps make the pattern more explicit in the implementation. For example, if you use the Strategy pattern for a text compositing algorithm, then you might have classes SimpleLayoutStrategy or TeXLayoutStrategy.
5. **Define the classes**. Declare their interfaces, establish their inheritance relationships, and define the instance variables that represent data and object references. Identify existing classes in your application that the pattern will affect, and modify them accordingly.
6. **Define application-specific names for operations in the pattern**. Here again, the names generally depend on the application. Use the responsibilities and collaborations associated with each operation as a guide. Also, be consistent in your naming conventions. For example, you might use the "Create-" prefix consistently to denote a factory method.
7. **Implement the operations to carry out the responsibilities and collaborations in the pattern**. The Implementation section offers hints to guide you in the implementation. The examples in the Same Code can help as well.

These are just guidelines to get you started. Over time you'll develop your own way of working with design patterns.

No discussion of how to use design patterns would be complete without a few words on how *not* to use them. Design patterns should not be applied indiscriminately. Often they achieve flexibility and variability by introducing additional levels of indirection, and that can complicate a design and/or cost you some performance. A design pattern should only be applied when the flexibility it affords is actually needed. The Consequences sections are most helpful when evaluating a pattern's benefits and liabilities.

Design aspects that design patterns let you vary:

|Purpose|Design Pattern|Aspect(s) That Can Vary|
|---|---|---|
|**Creational**|Abstract Factory|families of product objects|
||Builder|how a composite object gets created|
||Factory Method|subclass of object that is instantiated|
||Prototype|class of objects that is instantiated|
||Singleton|the sole instance of a class|
|**Structural**|Adapter|interface to an object|
||Bridge|implementation of an object|
||Composite|structure and composition of an object|
||Decorator|responsibilities of an object without subclassing|
||Facade|interface to a subsystem|
||Flyweight|storage costs of object|
||Proxy|how an object is accessed; its location|
|**Behavioral**|Chain of Responsibility|object that can fulfill a request|
||Command|when and how a request is fulfilled|
||Interpreter|grammar and interpretation of a language|
||Iterator|how an aggregate's elements are accessed, traversed|
||Mediator|how and which objects interact with each other|
||Memento|what private information is stored outside an object, and when|
||Observer|number of objects that depend on another object; how the dependent objects stay up to date|
||State|states of an object|
||Strategy|an algorithm|
||Template Method|steps of an algorithm|
||Visitor|operations that can be applied to object(s) without changing their class(es)|

